---
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=84
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Many progressives hold to an ideal of egalitarian participatory democracy according to which something like equal voice—relative equality of influence over the democratic process—is a cherished aim. Restrictions on individual and corporate spending on political speech are thought to be necessary in order to maintain relative equality of voice and influence. However, it seems likely that these sources of influence on public opinion are quite weak relative to the mass media, in which case suppressing them through regulation will only increase the already stronger relative power of those who own and use the media&#8217;s megaphones. So it is not clear to me why Mr Lessig has focused his crusade on the finance of political campaigns rather than on the massive inequalities of voice between Glenn Beck and my mechanic (or between Glenn Beck and Keith Olberman, for that matter). Why should a handful of Arianna Huffingtons and Rupert Murdochs be allowed such enormous power over public opinion and thereby over public policy? Why not regulate media with the aim of establishing fairness and balance in democratic voice?

Of course, there are many more or less obvious reasons we don&#8217;t want the state deciding who can communicate how much of which message. But one very practical reason few promote regulatory limits on the media&#8217;s liberty to print and broadcast whatever it likes is that the media will ferociously attack anyone who seeks to limit or moderate its massively outsized influence. Media outlets are much friendlier to proposals, such as campaign-finance reform, which tend to increase rather than diminish their relative influence over the public mind. I wonder whether Mr Lessig would count this as evidence of corruption.