---
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=626
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
While participating on the weekly PrivChat meeting, one of the participants mentioned an article in the Guardian titled &#8220;[Why Facebook&#8217;s new Open Graph makes us all part of the web underclass][1].&#8221; The article begins with a discussion of class, which for an American is both intriguing and mostly useless as we have never had a landed gentry that created a boundary&#8217;ed class system. Of course there are those who would disagree with me, but the American system of class is much more covert and complicated than the easy lines in Europe. In America, the issue of race is much more important than class, and when you get down to do it both class and race, I think, are just larger instances of basic ingroup/outgroup distinctions.

As is the case with these kinds of articles, the author confuses a number of important, denegrating very real problems while elevating smaller ones on the Internet to the level of social exclusion. And this is exactly what he is doing. The point of social exclusion is that you dont have control of your property. but the

If you use a paid-for web service at someone else&#8217;s domain you&#8217;re a tenant. A second class citizen. You don&#8217;t have much control. You&#8217;ll probably have to live with your landlord&#8217;s furniture and decoration and a restrictive set of rules. Your content will only exist at these URLs for as long as you keep paying the same people that monthly fee and for as long as your provider stays in business. Experience tells me that this isn&#8217;t very long. As a paying customer you&#8217;ll have a few rights under your contract, but they probably won&#8217;t amount to very much. When you leave you&#8217;ll probably be able to get your data back in a useful format, but when you put it back on the web somewhere else you&#8217;ll lose all your inbound links, search engine rankings and many of your visitors. This kind of service seems like a good deal until the day you need to move.

## Welcome to the web underclass

When you use a free web service you&#8217;re the underclass. At best you&#8217;re a guest. At worst you&#8217;re a beggar, couchsurfing the web and scavenging for crumbs. It&#8217;s a cliché but worth repeating: if you&#8217;re not paying for it, you&#8217;re aren&#8217;t the customer, you&#8217;re the product. Your individual account is probably worth very little to the service provider, so they&#8217;ll have no qualms whatsoever with tinkering with the service or even making radical changes in their interests rather than yours. If you don&#8217;t like it you&#8217;re welcome to leave. You may well not be able to take your content and data with you, and even if you can, all your URLs will be broken.

&nbsp;

 [1]: http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2011/sep/27/facebook-open-graph-web-underclass?fb=optOut