---
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=414
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Poverty is not any one person&#8217;s responsibility. Claiming that poverty is a personal deficiency is itself a severely deficient view. I am also hesitant to use the term poverty because to me, it is _the_ natural state of affairs. We are born into this world poor and sadly most have lived their lives the same way. Our ancestors were poor; what we have now is not the same. In a similar vein, I have a problem with the Marxist &#8220;poor/rich&#8221; dichotomy because in Sweden and Norway the kinds of disparities between the &#8220;rich and poor&#8221; are much less. It could be that the baseline level that these countries have is created by capitalism, but the majority of them are also quite wealthy, and most are extremely capitalist. I am willing to concede that point about the baseline, but these countries still do excellent jobs of caring for their citizens that I dont think should be overlooked.

But I digress.

Poverty is often used uni-dimensionally, akin to income, but in American it is more than just a lack of income. We have social exclusion. That is, individuals and entire communities of people are systematically blocked from rights, opportunities and resources (e.g. housing, employment, healthcare, civic engagement, democratic participation and due process). This is probably where it is perceived that I am conservative because I ascribe most of this as a fine legacy of the State. Restrictive covenants, redlining, public housing projects, the drug war, the relationship of property taxes to school income, all are contributors to this exclusion. For example, in Chicago during the Great Migration, it was just as expensive to live in the South Side in the poorest of neighborhoods as compared to the Gold Coast because restrictive covenants had decreased the supply of housing to such an extent that it drove prices through the roof. The drug war for its own part has terrorized neighborhoods, destroyed local social trust and cohesion, and lead to a break in communities.

If governments were not to engage in this widespread social meddling, it is my belief that many would be better off.