---
title: The Utility Function
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=529
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
I was reading [Adam Theirer&#8217;s piece on public utilities][1]. In the comments section, someone noted that,

> Mr. Theirer,
> 
> You have conflated three different ideas, that of “monopoly” (or more appropriately oligopoly), with “natural monopoly”, with that “public utility”. You even provide the unfortunate example of the “local sewage company”, of which there is no such thing (you were probably thinking of a water company). Many public utilities are government services (such as sewage collection and treatment) which the private sector does not and cannot provide profitably.
> 
> In contrast to this is the “natural monopoly” such as the delivery of electricity, natural gas, potable water, telephone services, and the like. While some of these services are sometimes provided by government agencies, they are more typically provided by the private sector. However, it is simply prohibitively inefficient (and unprofitable) for more than one private company to provide these services in a given geographical area. Having more than one private water company laying pipes in the streets and then competing with each other house to house simply does not work. Further, given the natural tendency toward monopoly in these services, the consumer is placed at a huge disadvantage. Most states have created Public Utilities Commissions (PUCs or some other similar name)to regulate these natural monopolies when they provider is a private company.
> 
> Finally, there are strict monopolies and oligopolies which are not “natural” but completely dominate a market. They usually come to dominate the market through superior competition. These are not usually considered “public utilities” and are not generally regulated through a PUC but rather under Anti-Trust regulations. The problem here is that a company can use its monopoly position to offer unfair competition and crush (or force the purchase of) competing companies. I suppose one could call these “competitive monopolies”.
> 
> Take the case of Microsoft’s “Bing” search engine. The Window’s GUI completely dominates the PC market. Did Microsoft use its Monopoly status to to surreptitiously siphon off Google generated search matches? The recently document case of the “hiybbprqag” test would suggest that they did. Would it not seem then that they are inappropriately leveraging that market position to take advantage of Google’s software having to operate in Microsoft environment? Is that not at least a prima face case for an anti-trust lawsuit?
> 
> Bringing all of this back together, it seems that the case against Facebook, LinkedIn, Google, Twitter &c is not that they are “public utilities”, or even “natural monopolies” but that they constitute some sort of “competitive monopolies”.

 [1]: http://blogs.forbes.com/adamthierer/2011/07/24/the-danger-of-making-facebook-linkedin-google-and-twitter-public-utilities/