---
title: Nationalism and the Internet
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=606
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
[From the Monkey Cage,][1]

> Kaplan argues that East Asian security competition is different from past conflicts:
> 
> Instead of fascism or militarism, China, along with other states in East Asia, is increasingly defined by the persistence of old-fashioned nationalism: **an idea, certainly, but not one that since the mid-19th century has been attractive to intellectuals**.
> 
> This is a remarkable claim. The rise of nationalism has historically been intertwined with the efforts of intellectuals to construct and re-imagine national pasts and articulate present worldviews and demands. <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Nationalism-Roads-Modernity-Liah-Greenfeld/dp/0674603192/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1313598306&sr=8-1" target="_blank">Greenfeld</a> has noted “the central role played in the emergence of national identities by intellectuals” (22). There were many romantic nationalist intellectuals in Europe prior to the horrors of World War II. After the war, anti-colonial nationalisms frequently had roots in the upwardly mobile local intelligentsia (India and French Indochina being excellent examples). <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Imagined-Communities-Reflections-Origin-Nationalism/dp/1844670864/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1313598319&sr=1-1" target="_blank">Anderson</a> argues that “intelligentsias were central to the rise of nationalism in the colonial territories” (116), which tended to occur well after the mid-19<sup>th</sup> century. Even in the modern world, battles over identity are often waged by nationalist intellectuals. Nationalism is one of the most important forces in the modern world, in part because of its production and propagation by intellectuals. It’s hard to know what to make of an analysis of nationalism that says the exact opposite.

The rhetoric of cyberwarfare fits nicely within this conception. As one of our most proud and innovative ideas, the Internet is not just a product of the US, but a product imbued with the very essence of Americanism &#8211; open, equitable, and immensely practical. Jerry Brito has done some very interesting work on this subject, but I would want to expand it further.

 [1]: http://themonkeycage.org/blog/2011/08/17/robert-kaplan-nationalism-and-confusion-guest-post-by-paul-staniland/