---
title: Notes on Constitutional Interpretation Part 2
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=455
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
> (1) **Internal evidence.** Internal evidence is the actual details present inside a given work. The apparent content of a work is the internal evidence, including any historical knowledge and past expertise or experience with the kind of art being interpreted that is required to understand what that work is: its forms and traditions. The form of epic poetry, the meter, quotations etc. are internal to the work. This information is internal to the type (or genre) of art that is being examined, and includes those things physically present in the work itself. Analysis of an artwork based on internal evidence never presents an intentional fallacy.

> (2) **External evidence.** What is not literally contained in the work itself is external to that work, including all statements the artist made privately or published in journals about the work, or in conversations, e-mail, etc. External evidence is concerned with claims about why the artist made the work: reasons external to the fact of the work in itself. Evidence of this type is directly concerned with what the artist may have intended to do even or especially when it is not apparent from the work itself, and is an example of an intentional fallacy.

> (3) **Contextual evidence.** The third type of evidence concerns any meanings produced from a particular work&#8217;s relationship to other art made by the same artist—including its exhibition (where, when and by whom). The use of biographical information in a discussion of an artwork does not _necessarily_ indicate an intentional fallacy. The meaning of an artist&#8217;s work may be affected by the particulars of who does the work (identity) without necessarily that interpretation as an intentional fallacy.

&nbsp;

This is not to say that the  It does not matter much what was said, the true power has been in its power to capture the

It is our esteem of the text that gives it power. The mere act of giving the Constitution authors assign a series of corresponding interpretations to it and thus impose a limit on it. But

Again, I want to say that this is not