---
title: The Domesticated Digital Animal
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=496
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
There is an ongoing discussion at the Cyborgology group blog about terms. What are we to call this? What is that thing in front of you, that looky box of magic and amusement, doing to your mind? Are we experiencing a new reality, and what does that mean?

Nathan Jurgenson writes,

> In a 2009 post titled “<a href="http://thesocietypages.org/sociologylens/2009/10/05/towards-theorizing-an-augmented-reality/" target="_blank">Towards Theorizing An Augmented Reality</a>,” I discussed geo-tagging (think Foursquare or Facebook Places), street view, face recognition, the Wii controller and the fact that sites like Facebook both impact and are impacted by the physical world to argue that “digital and material realities dialectically co-construct each other.” This is opposed to the notion that the Internet is like the Matrix, where there is a “real” (Zion) that you leave when you enter the virtual space (the Matrix) -an outdated perspective as Facebook is increasingly real and our physical world increasingly digital.

I agree with him on the general premise, which reminds me of a story. Recently, I was at a conference on community development and, as these things tend to go, ended up having a conversation with lady in her 60s about the Internet. She was confused with my generation. Why aren&#8217;t kids going outside? Why aren&#8217;t they playing and being social? Why, instead, are they texting and talking on the Internet? It was clear that I was not going to sway her of this belief of a generational nadir, though I tried to convince her anyway. As I said, meaning and identity is what is at stake. Both are being constructed in a different way now, not better or worse, just different. Perhaps I should have told her, you know, &#8220;digital and material realities dialectically co-construct each other.&#8221; I am sure it would have been enough to persuade, but alas, she was not buying my intellectual wares.

I want to take a different tact. And so I shall.

I want to offer my own language on these matters because I think most of the current discussion is slanted, ever so slightly, towards technological determinism. Cyborg, cyborgology, digital, augmented reality, all speak of a new way of doing things, as though we have grown up and out of our primate forms. The cyborg traditionally defined is a person that has integrated with its technology, implying that there is something new about her, a technological ubermensch. I am constantly reminded of de Waal&#8217;s introduction to The Naked Ape when I read about this nascent sociological study,

> In becoming so erudite, Homo sapiens has remained a naked ape nonetheless; in acquiring lofty new motives, he has lost none of the earthy old ones. This is frequently a cause of some embarrassment to him, but his old impulses have been with him for millions of years, his new ones only a few thousand at the most-and there is no hope of quickly shrugging off the accumulated genetic legacy of his whole evolutionary past. He would be a far less worried and more fulfilled animal if only he would face up to this fact.

We are animals. We will never fully escape these bodies, not even death will allow us to escape our flesh tomes, and for some this is simply too much to admit. Regardless of what we might put in or take from our bodies, alter or enhance, we cannot escape the primate form. Some would say that this is a dismal view, but anything less is intellectually disingenuous.

And what are we to say about the primitive human, our truly closest cousin? When looking onto their world, a world of hunting and gathering, a world that we see in Discovery Channel shows and manuscripts from the early twentieth century, we are struck by their view of reality. Rocks and rivers, animals and tools all combine to form a matrix of reality and meaning. The actual world is meshed with the spiritual, giving rise to complex causal relationships between equal agents. Io! Jupiter! The spirits are conspiring against us! The hills truly are alive, but with the sound of terror. As modern people, we constantly resist this urge for supernatural meaning. Fate, I might remind you, was not singular in Roman times, but plural &#8211; three goddesses who spun the thread of life, then measured it, and finally cut it loose.

No, I don&#8217;t think we are cyborgs in any sense of the word, nor is any erudition going to allow us to escape it. We are apes, and this is why I am calling the current process we are engaged in digital domestication.

For millennium, we have domesticated plants and animals, taming them for our use and pleasure. At each point that humans came to be in a new environment, we adapted those things around us, but we didnt come out of the experience unscathed. Humans have also been domesticated. Culture is not something that we can touch or hold because culture is what we do, and what we do effectively changes us. And meaning, well, if you think that

Coming from Latin, domestication originally meant &#8220;of the house; familiar, native; civil, private, personal.&#8221; This is what digitally we are doing. Digital natives

&nbsp;

<div class="video-container">
  <blockquote class="wp-embedded-content" data-secret="7xDMjMBwbx">
    <p>
      <a href="https://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2011/02/24/digital-dualism-versus-augmented-reality/">Digital Dualism versus Augmented Reality</a>
    </p>
  </blockquote>
  
  <p>
    </div> 
    
    <p>
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestication_theory
    </p>
    
    <p>
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_shaping_of_technology
    </p>
    
    <div class="video-container">
      <blockquote class="wp-embedded-content" data-secret="IITPWgfsvg">
        <p>
          <a href="https://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2010/10/26/facebook-homepage-for-a-cyborg-planet-2/">Facebook &#8211; Homepage for a Cyborg Planet</a>
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        </div>