---
title: My Problem with Rawlsianism
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=244
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
It didn&#8217;t hit me until today for some reason, but the original position and the veil of ignorance are game theoretic situations of bargaining. Here is a reminder provided by that lovely muse, Wikipedia:

> The original position is a hypothetical situation developed by American philosopher John Rawls as a thought experiment to replace the imagery of a savage state of nature of prior political philosophers like Thomas Hobbes. In it, the parties select principles that will determine the basic structure of the society they will live in. This choice is made from behind a veil of ignorance, which would deprive participants of information about their particular characteristics: his or her ethnicity, social status, gender and, crucially, Conception of the Good (an individual&#8217;s idea of how to lead a good life). This forces participants to select principles impartially and rationally.

Ok. Yes, this is all well and good, but what about reality?

The problem here is behavioral modernity. This is the line, the break between primitive societies, which didn&#8217;t progress for thousands of years, and behaviorally modern societies, which made and make massive strides year over year. Think about the world 450,000 years from now. In this time scale, primitive societies would not have advanced at all. People in these societies would have been using the same tools, engaged in the same kind of hunting and would be socially organized in similar sized bands. Because of this shift, we had

  * finely-made tools
  * fishing
  * systematic use of pigment and jewelry for decoration or self-ornamentation
  * figurative art
  * game playing and music
  * burial rituals

Let&#8217;s do this the way stogy scientists do it. The dependent variable (the thing being explained) is behavioral modernity, which is really the most important development of humanity and what we are trying to explain is the independent variable (how it came to be). It is commonly thought that our leap came from a couple developments, which aren&#8217;t easily separated &#8211; abstract language, [bartering][1] and ethics. The problem is that all of these developments are tied together. Language as a means of

&nbsp;

 [1]: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V8F-4FK7H50-1&_user=186797&_coverDate=09%2F30%2F2005&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=gateway&_origin=gateway&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1734280502&_rerunOrigin=scholar.google&_acct=C000013678&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=186797&md5=2ec49c3b3df682281f9b1d124fb70250&searchtype=a