---
title: Der Staat
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=804
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
This post is an homage to Franz Oppenheimer.

In 1908 he published &#8220;Der Staat,&#8221; to translate from his native German, &#8220;The State.&#8221; It was the beginning of a major project of sociology that he was trying to build, and while a lot of his work has been tossed to the side, his excellent book on the Oppenheimer was at his core a sociologist, and a first rate one at that. Though he had clear training in philosophy, he was a sociological theorist.

He meant to create an intelligible series of arguments about the formation and the ethic duties of Der Staat.

The

The State was distinguishable from governance by the public-private cabal. Governance seeks only to secure

One could, in the

He begun rightly with the most important part-the formation of the state.

The is-ought distinction is important. Hume was right. If we are to be sociologists and describe the

The question changes: not how _should_ it be formed, but how _did_ it formed.

Rightly Oppenheimer had to reject the contractual view of the state as the is (classical) liberals had, and I think we need to be clear that is probably right. While we might live peaceably now (disputed term for sure) it is clear that the origin of the state was not the coming together.

As we know from history, he Magna Carta and from the slow retrieval of rights from the kings, that what. The English Civil War.

What they

Even now in the Middle East. One could conceivable say that they are writing new contracts with each other.

&nbsp;

The modern world is distinguished from the pre-modern by the rise of the bureaucratic state.