---
title: Thinkings
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=825
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
  * Adam Smith is a nuanced utilitarian: he believes that we generalize rules of conduct based on our perceptions of actions&#8217; utility or disutility and that these rules receive definite expression, subject to future emendation, in the persona of an impartial spectator.
  * Fleischacker discusses these matters at length (chaps. 8 and 10) and concludes that Smith cannot rightly be considered a &#8220;right-wing&#8221; thinker: &#8220;I am inclined to think Smith&#8217;s strong moral concern for the poor, and view of them as equal in decency and desert to everyone else in society, would have led him more toward the left than the right of [today&#8217;s] political spectrum&#8221;
  * The question with redistribution is how do we (or can we) take the moral intuitions and make them into a set of legal obligations. In other words how do we structure the prescriptive to comport with our given ought. The moral case is quite compelling, but the legal enforcement turns out to be extremely problematic for a variety of technical reasons. Ultimately I think it is a good gesture, as it signals a kind of moral community we want, but it is not a game changer, which is what we need. 
      * Technical issues might include changing incentives, both on the top end and on the bottom end.
      * Rent control, for example, is a huge transfer of wealth from the poor to the wealthy.
      * We actually need enforcement isonomia.
  * Often when presented with the case for not voting, people will then say, well if everyone agreed with you . This is an automatici application of the Kantian categorical imperative. Just because I am arguing that you shouldn&#8217;t does not mean you will, nor does it mean that you should actually believe me.
  * Why isn&#8217;t the call for voting also occuring in the &#8220;off years&#8221;?