---
title: The Bias(es) in Communication
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=793
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
McChesney is undoubtedly _the_theorist of the political economy of media. A couple of books, a number of articles, a radio show, and a large following put him here. And while McChesney&#8217;s contribution to the discipline has been immense, his command of policy and economics had lead to a number of unfortunate conclusions. McChesney&#8217;s book begins with an overarching question,

> The central question for media political economists is whether, on balance, the media system serves to promote or undermine democratic institutions and practices. Are media a force for social justice or for oligarchy? And equipped with that knowledge, what are the options for citizens to address the situation?

Democracy as a guiding light is understood only when our first principles is equality. But it also means that we are forgoing otther kinds of criticism of media; what kind of Democracy here is a very blunt instrument to talk about how media can and does accomplish a number of objectives. I do not start with the position of ought, I begin with is and then work from there to see what kinds of oughts we are capable of having given what we know about institutions. principle is understood when ano These questions presuppose a set of moral beliefs about the world and about our media, that are by no means universal. That media should is in fact a  Most are not critical towards media for its relationship towards democracy. Rather, they worry about the content and what it means as an expression of our society and the kinds of entertainment. I would actually doubt that many care about. Of course, this doesn&#8217;t mean that we shouldn&#8217;t strive for Sadly, because of Christopher Yoo&#8217;s potentially important contribution to communication theory (and critical theory for that matter) will be lost. But the concept is simple&#8211;because of rate regulation and others structural laws, there is a bias towards advertisement based content. A number of programs and , which

> Encourages television and radio programmers to be consumerist in focus and makes them overly responsive to those demographic groups that are the most susceptible to advertising. Conversely, it tends to bias the market against programming preferred by those who are the least responsive to advertising.

Said another wy, the tendency because of