---
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=755
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
The scuff up between Microsoft and Do Not Track is at core a philosophical issues, [says Paul Bernal][1]:

> Defaults matter. They really matter. From a philosophical perspective they matter because they suggest (and even sometimes set) the norms of the society. Is our ‘norm’ that we’re happy to be tracked and surveilled? That’s what setting the default to ‘opt-out’ means. It means that ‘normal’ people don’t mind being tracked, it’s only extremists and privacy geeks that care, and they’ll find their way to turn the tracking off. I don’t know about the rest of you, but that’s a norm I don’t want to accept!

In economics, signaling is the term given to actions where one party credibly conveys some information about itself to another. A college education is often given as an example of signaling. It is not that the person learns a whole lot in college, but they convey to possible employers the kind of information that is useful. As Bryan Caplan [explains][2], &#8220;Good students tend to be smart, hard-working, and conformist &#8211; three crucial traits for almost any job.&#8221; What did the student study? What did he learn how to do? &#8220;Mere details,&#8221; Caplan adds. &#8220;As long as you were a good student, employers surmise that you&#8217;ll quickly learn what you need to know on the job.&#8221; Bernal seems to suggest something of the sort with Do Not Track, which begs the question—how much of our discussion about privacy is just a societal signal that we care about it? As Bernal readily admits,

> There have been good pieces written about the down side of opt-in – most notably ‘opt-in dystopias’ by Lundbad and Masiello (which you can find <a href="http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/vol7-1/lundblad.asp" target="_blank">here</a>), and it cannot be denied that opt-in is far from a panacea.

And yet he retorts,

 [1]: http://paulbernal.wordpress.com/2012/06/07/opt-in-is-no-red-herring/
 [2]: http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2011/11/the_magic_of_ed.html