---
title: IHS Seminar Post
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=824
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
<div>
  Session 1:
</div>

<div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      Are there features of Germany and Russia that make it different than England and France and the US?
    </li>
    <ul>
      <li>
        Did Germany have the counter enlightenment? p 43 suggests this view
      </li>
      <li>
        What about the difference between positive and negative rights?
      </li>
      <li>
        Comte and Saint Simon and their views of progress as defined communally [look too at Marx] seems to suggest something different than in Germany
      </li>
      <li>
        The West still engaged in large scale depopulation [<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expulsion_of_Germans_after_World_War_II">http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expulsion_of_Germans_after_World_War_II</a>]
      </li>
    </ul>
    
    <li>
      &#8220;Neither the past nor the existing legal rules are free from grave defects&#8221; p 45
    </li>
    <li>
      &#8220;To create conditions in which competition will be as effective as possible, to prevent fraud and deception, to break up monopolies &#8211; these tasks provide a wide and unquestioned field for state activity&#8221; p 46
    </li>
    <li>
      P 47 & 48 hint at the positive v negative liberty distinction
    </li>
    <li>
      We might also call this otherization: &#8220;The contrast between the we and the they is consequently always employed by those who seek the allegiance of huge masses&#8221; p 53
    </li>
    <li>
      &#8220;To be a useful assistant in the running of a totalitarian state, therefore, a man must be prepared to break every moral rule he has ever known if this seems necessary to achieve the end set for him&#8221; p 54
    </li>
    <ul>
      <li>
        Stanford Prison Experiment seems to suggest that morality is connected with roles
      </li>
      <li>
        Assumes that there is morality embedded and that it is not created and sustained through a system / education / situation
      </li>
      <li>
        He later states, &#8220;It is not difficult to deprive a great majority of independent thought
      </li>
    </ul>
    
    <li>
      In a totalitarian state: &#8220;Every activity must derive its justification from conscious social purpose&#8221; p 56
    </li>
    <li>
      P 57 details how the Rule of Law is negated in totalitarian states
    </li>
    <li>
      It is also argued that technological changes have made competition
    </li>
    <li>
      Critiques:
    </li>
    <ul>
      <li>
        America, as Seymour Martin Lipset points out, is the only country where it is possible to be un-American. That is, compared to China or France, ethnicity is not connected to national identity. Being American is an ideological commitment.
      </li>
      <li>
        Socialist is collectivist, which America is not by any measure. See above
      </li>
      <li>
        I think that Hayek is weirdly seduced by the Marxist notion that America will  be the first to fall
      </li>
    </ul>
    
    <li>
      P 226 &#8211; He assumes that information production has been cartelized by socialists which doesnt seem to  be the case
    </li>
    <li>
      There are two ways, as Hayek seems to explain, that this action occurs. The first is through the normative or the Humean ought, which we can compare to the Humean is. (Remember that the Humean is has been rationalized in the scientific sense) And then the engineering success which is what he points out is the perscriptive, that is the connection between the is and the ought, the policy
    </li>
  </ul>
  
  <div>
    Session 2:
  </div>
  
  <div>
    <ul>
      <li>
        This paper has always irked me because it seems that he is not talking about entrepreneurship / innovation
      </li>
      <li>
        Knowledge how is different than knowledge that &#8211; This solves my tensions with Freeland as concerning the knowledge problem.
      </li>
      <li>
        Perhaps it really just is the rhetoric, the way that he argues and utilizes the language, the way that the arguments are constructed
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          The curious task of economics is to demonstrate to men how little they really know about what they imagine they can design
        </li>
        <li>
          The task of economics is to demonstrate how little we know about what we can design. [This statement is so superfluous]
        </li>
      </ul>
      
      <li>
        He talks so wantonly about the destruction of freedom and democratic institutions in 1939
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Walter Williams in front of Cato
        </li>
        <li>
          Rule of Law is not and has not been applied
        </li>
        <li>
          http://www.forbes.com/2010/05/24/rand-paul-rachel-maddow-opinions-columnists-richard-a-epstein.html?partner=email
        </li>
      </ul>
      
      <li>
        P 194 &#8211; 195 talks about the difference between planning the system of rules and planning the actions taken within those rules. In other words, he seems to pushing back against the planning that we might technocracy.
      </li>
      <li>
        If the experiment of planning leads to the disappearance of free instutitons there will be no opportunity for the correction of that mistake p 211
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          What about the &#8220;law market&#8221;?
        </li>
      </ul>
    </ul>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    Session 3:
  </div>
  
  <div>
    <ul>
      <li>
        The competitive system is the only system that is designed to minimize the power that one has over another p 41
      </li>
      <li>
        Introduction: Important of ideas for civilization.  See the Moral Landscape
      </li>
      <li>
        The state in which a (wo)man is not the subject to coercion by the arbitrary will of another or other is often distinguished as individual or personal freedom and whenever we want to remind the reader that it is in this sense that we are using freedom, we shall employ that expression
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          All of the great civil rights battles were fights over this very thing
        </li>
        <li>
          Social justice falls under this rubric
        </li>
        <li>
          Does it necessitate that this definition of freedom then implies the dichotomy of responsibility?
        </li>
      </ul>
    </ul>
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    Session 4:
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    Session 5:
  </div>
  
  <div>
    <ul>
      <li>
        Not only is liberty a system under which all government action is guided by principles, but it is an ideal that will not be preserved unless it is itself accepted as an overriding principle governing all particular acts of legislation. Where no such fundamental rule is stubbornly adhered to as an ultimate ideal about which there must be no compromise  for the sake of material advantages – as an ideal which, even though it may have to be temporarily infringed during a passing emergency, must form the basis of all permanent arrangements – freedom is almost certain to be destroyed by piecemeal encroachments.
      </li>
      <li>
        It is character rather than volume of government activity that is important
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          Governance is more important than size
        </li>
        <li>
          It is not then small government for small governments sake but for better outcomes
        </li>
        <li>
          See Frank Fukuyama
        </li>
      </ul>
      
      <li>
        Making the Rule of Law a meta-law then replaces Natural Law as a guiding principle. Without Natural Law, there is nothing above from which one can judge the rules or the laws of the State, and so by placing the rule of Law atop he has solved this problem.
      </li>
      <ul>
        <li>
          All positive law derives its validity from some rules that have not in this sens been made by men but which can found and that these rules provide both the criterion for justice of positive law and the ground for men&#8217;s obedience to it. p 345
        </li>
      </ul>
      
      <li>
        Major criticism of this: His constitution has been thoroughly systematized. Not everyone will agree with this systemization, though I agree with it. See Haidt.
      </li>
      <li>
        Hypocrisy is a betrayal of logic; it&#8217;s accepting a premise under one situation but rejecting that same premise in another situation without having a valid reason distinguishing them. This ignores the reason that people so strongly oppose the restriction of choice in matters of reproduction: the act of curtailing the freedom, regardless of whether it&#8217;s done for good or bad reasons, causes substantial harm to the person.
      </li>
      <li>
      </li>
    </ul>
    
    <p>
      Session 6:
    </p>
  </div>
</div>

&nbsp;