---
title: Why You Shouldn’t Care About Bias Within Advocacy
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1012
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
I am not a fan of the show &#8220;House of Cards&#8221; because I was expecting something. The malice that seems is just not a part of Washington. Mind you, I have only worked in this town for a year or so,

This is of course paranoia. It is not just. Instead of considering the arguments, which we took a lot of time to consider and word. This is not part of the liberal democratic tradition.

Even though I vehemently disagree with Susan Crawford, regardless of who she worked for, I would never speak ill of her intentions. I know she

Much like Percy Shelley,

Money, like a desolating pestilence, pollutes whatever it touches.

It is more than just a fallacy, it is an unimpressive argument. In fact, both organizations tend to

Yes my organization is funded, but I work with the people that I do because I believe in their.

Countless

My colleague Berin left the corporate world, where he could have made much more, to do policy work. We all believe in the and take the stances we do because. A very close friend of mine choose to leave his job instead of publish something he didn&#8217;t believe. These are the stories that are hardly told. Washington

Sociology calls this process Otherization. By making you make the other group inhumane. We try very hard to do just that.

As my colleagues note in the, we are asking for

&nbsp;

Don&#8217;t assume malice