---
title: One Explanation Why Corporations and Profits Are Derided
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=945
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Libertarians face a vexing problem: how do we consistently frame our views of corporations without seeming like apologists?

The trouble is, we are apologists. Much like Socrates who spoke his _apologia,_ or defense, against his detractors, or early Christians advancing their beliefs, we are defending the faith. We are advancing a creed of free enterprise, free labor and free minds. The corporation is just our contemporary means to these ends. They are not perfect, clearly, but as we have to explain time and again this should not be an indictment of the corporate form, just a recognition of humanity&#8217;s imperfection.

Many cannot claim to hold this kind view, and understandably so. When &#8220;corporation&#8221; is mentioned, images of Wall Street are conjured, an industry far from the ideal. Similarly, many hear free trade and  think of NAFTA, which is hardly a model we should outsource. To top it all off, those who run corporations often cloak themselves in the moniker of freedom without actually subscribing to the faith. For us, they commit the worse kind of apostasy.

Profits, too, cause hesitancy. As an animating force for corporations, profits seem to sully the entire endeavor. Bill Gates made billions with Microsoft, and each step of the way was condemned and chastised. But after Microsoft was served with an antitrust investigation and some years passed, Gates turned to philanthropy and turned the public. Warren Buffet is similarly a mirror. His company has made a lot of profit over the years, he has made off handily, and yet his character seems to escape scrutiny.

Compare this framing to the Waltons.

Walmart&#8217;s profits are decried, even though they tend to serve customers at a lower prices, which give individuals more consumer surplus. Localism is the word de jure. Mom and pop stores über alles! But when we think of small businesses, mom and pop stores, we actually mean micro-businesses. Small business owners in the US are defined as those business that employ less than 500 employees if they are in manufacturing or have less than $7 million in annual receipts. Hardly mom and pop, but not Wal-Mart either.

As Jim Sanborn conveyed in his obtuse way: &#8220;between subtle shading and the absence of light lies the nuance of illusion.&#8221; Somewhere in between the mom and pop and Microsoft lies the truth about the disdain for both profits and corporations.

Of course, we should rightly take to heart the words of _our_ apologia&#8217;s writer, Deirdre McCloskey:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  Guilt over success in a commercial society is for a victimless crime. Yet the children of the bourgeoisie seek an identity challenging that of their elders. The clerisy by which the children are taught accuses the middle class of inauthenticity, and plays on pseudoaristocratic contempt for &#8220;middle&#8221; construed as &#8220;mediocre.&#8221; None of this makes very much sense. A commercial life can be as authentic and virtuous as that of a philosopher or priest. We need to recover its wholeness and holiness.
</p>

Her call, like many others is one to action, a positive outlook in the face of embittered opposition. A thorough explanation of why this occurs is still lacking.

Adam Smith provides the seed in &#8220;The Theory of Moral Sentiments:&#8221;

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  “By the imagination we place ourselves in his situation, we conceive ourselves enduring all the same torments, we enter as it were into his body, and become in some measure the same with him.”
</p>

For Smith this imagination, which he later titled fellow-feeling, is the base of virtues. It is a sentiment, more basic than emotions, that we encounter fellow-feeling. Like Neitszche&#8217;s will to power or Shopenhauer&#8217;s will to live, Smith&#8217;s fellow feeling is the root of our humanity.

Consider pity and sympathy. Both come from this very core sentiment and similarly, both entail imagination of the other. We cannot feel sympathy if we do not understand that this could be us. The same with pity. Taking a different tact, fellow-feeling allows us to work together. By considering the other person, we can make the cognitive leap. We can anticipate, create, decide and coordinate. I think this is part of the blame why many people feel so disconnected with the world. Their jobs do not entail this fellow-feeling. They are not able to connect to Excel worksheets as we can connect with a person by talking to them for a couple of minutes. Quite literally, it is a loss of humanity.

“It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest” is a thoroughly non-contextual statement from Smith. After talking about the uses of language and its purpose, but before talking about the benevolence of the butcher and the brewer (was Smith drinking his dinner?), he says,

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  In civilized society [a person] stands at all times in need of the cooperation and assistance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to gain the friendship of a few persons. In almost every other race of animals each individual, when it is grown up to maturity, is entirely independent, and in its natural state has occasion for the assistance of no other living creature. But man has almost constant occasion for the help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it from their benevolence only.
</p>

Curious then this animal homo sapien. It has to rely on others for its dinner and yet how is it to do this? Not benevolence says Smith, self interest. As many times as I have heard this quote, I have yet to hear the most logical question. Yes, Mr. Smith, but why self-interest? Why is it that I can trust your self interest? Fellow-feeling. It is not just that we do everything for our own self interest, or rather, we could say that our self-interest compels us to imagine what it would be like to get shifted in a deal and rightly we decide against it. In short, we have sympathy. Reading Smith with modern eyes,

So, how does this relate to corporations?

It seems that the ascription of agency is different from the ascription of subjective experience. Apparently people find it more natural to give a corporation agency, than they do subjective experiences. Take a second and consider these sentences:

  * Apple intends to release a new iPad in August.
  * Google wants to change its corporate image.
  * Microsoft is now experiencing great joy.

The last one seems off.

Following the lead of Thomas Negel, most philosophers now say that experiences are phenomenal. There is a _there_ there when it comes to experience. What it is like to be hungry is different than what it is like to be angry or melancholy, but nevertheless,  they are all connected by their experience or quale. Edouard Machery and Justin Sytsma explained the importance of recent findings in an article from [The Philosophers Magazine][1],

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  People distinguish the sheer possession of an emotion from the experience of what it is like to have that emotion. The idea is that ordinary people hold that while a corporation can have an emotion, it cannot experience what it is like to have that emotion, and as a consequence it cannot properly be said to feel the emotion.
</p>

There are two takeaways from this. First, it seems as though there is a natural tendency for people to ascribe agency to things that might not be things. Corporations are things in name only. They do not have a location. They do not walk around and grab a cappuccino. They do not think. Yet, there is a tendency to ascribe agency to entities that can act. This is not very controversial. Secondly, there is a huge cognitive difference between an agent and an agent that can subjectively experience the world. Perhaps for the sake of this essay, I should say rather that there is a very big difference between an agent where we can ascribe fellow-feeling and an agent where we cannot.

We cannot feel or understand a  corporation. It acts, but does not experience. There is no fellow-feeling to be had with a corporation. It&#8217;s purposes are murky, almost inhuman.

 [1]: http://www.justinsytsma.com/docs/forum-tpm-52-machery-sytsma.pdf