---
title: Affirmative First Amendment Theory
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1053
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
[First Monday][1] is a peer reviewed journal on the net, housed by my Alma Mater, UIC. There is often thought provoking content, but as was the case with April&#8217;s edition, I often find myself at odds with the theories advanced.

In &#8220;Responsibilities of the state: Rethinking the case and possibilities for public support of journalism,&#8221; Daniel Kreiss and Mike Ananny put forward a comprehensive theory as to why the state should support journalism.

They begin by articulating the intent of their argument:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  We argue that both ‘market’ and ‘network’ optimists fail to adequately consider the kind of journalism democracies need and how they often lack ways to secure the resources necessary to support it.
</p>

The logic of the market, they proclaim, often fails at supporting the Fourth Estate.

Implicit a lot of work of political economy of the media is the yardstick of public interest. But, judging publications by their service to democracy is just one kind of aesthetic adjudication. Surveys of political ignorance often suggest that there is something wrong with swaths of the public. You can hear the judgement in the questions: people don&#8217;t know who their Senator and/or Representative is! Since when did this become a requirement of living a good life? It could be that instead of representing something wrong with populace, it in fact suggests something problematic about the political process. To say it another way, there is no premie facie demands to being a part of the democratic polity.

Without seeming a blah, it is was actually during the Progressive Era that citizenship and the demands of newspapers received a recontextualization.

The name of Michael Schudson is invoked at various times in this paper, but his account of citizenship, The Good Citizen, puts this process into proper historical context: &#8220;A nineteenth-century voter demonstrated his citizenship through loyalty to party add the local fraternity that was its most palpable manifestation. A twentieth-century was obliged to act out something new and untested in the political universe &#8211; citizenship by virtue of informed competence.&#8221; This standard of judgement began as an awkward child in the Progressive Era, and has yet to grow much since its adolescence. Robust political discussion was not a trait of the Revolutionary period. Loyalists were often harassed or censured.

With each right comes a corresponding duty. My right live, for example, places a duty on you to not take my life. The same has to be true of a positive right to free speech. The right to be heard implies a duty to listen, which is not the case

To intellectually buttress their argument, the authors review the concept of Affirmative First Amendment Theory. Still

Without going all of the way, the authors seems to suggest that a right be heard should be included.

Clearly it is a new, coming at the same time as the informational markets fractured.

&nbsp;

I cannot help but think that such a position is an explicit affront to the evolutionary process under which we live.

This also suggests that individuals must be citizens. That they must be involved in the political process.

 [1]: http://firstmonday.org/