---
title: Don’t Legalize Property Destruction as Protest
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=953
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Twenty five hundred signatories is a low considering the attention it is getting, but a WhiteHouse.gov petition has surfaced arguing that DDOS attacks should be considered legal protests. There is a bit of truth to the petition. &#8220;Distributed denial-of-service is not any form of hacking in any way. It is the equivalent of repeatedly hitting the refresh button on a webpage.” Yes, the actual attack is not technically hacking, but in order to get the number of computers to effectivelt take down a site, it is easier if they are hacked.

Protest is of course an important part of political speech, and political speech has rightly garnered a more robust First Amendment protection than other kinds of speech. Clearly, however, the petition&#8217;s author is no philosopher or lawyer.

&nbsp;

We cannot, however, confuse the two. Protest through political Yet, there is no right to protest, as their is a limit on the government&#8217;s ability to stop you from pr To be clear, there  Yet, these acts are  not so much protest as they are property destruction. Moreover, there are a number of cases where the act is used not for political speech.

DDOS attacks create headaches and long hours for the service staff, and predictably expensive billable hours. Regardless of what other might say, DDOS attacks create costs that are incurred by private parties. There are of course many misconceptions with free speech, but among the biggest is that speech should have no costs.

&nbsp;

yeah the civil rights protesters were engaging in common law trespass as well as breaking the racist jim crow laws.  here they want to be able to interfere with internet traffic in a way that i

Hacktivists, no doubt, add an interesting angle on this and the legality of

&nbsp;