---
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=955
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Thomas Jefferson was never one to mince words:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  I hope we shall crush in its birth the aristocracy of our moneyed corporations, which dare already to challenge our government to a trial of strength and bid defiance to the laws of our country.
</p>

Jefferson&#8217;s populism is an integral part of the American politics. Though his brand of populism had an agrarian bent, the general sentiment continues to pop up, emotionally undergirding many of America&#8217;s most successful political movements. Andrew Jackson, the Progressive Movement and Ronald Reagan all used an elitist antipathy for political gain. And it continues today, though with different clothes:

As I see it, there are two tightly co-mingled issues that need to be parsed. One is the corporation-as-speaker question: what restrictions should we place on commercial free speech? Generally, I am in favor of few restrictions here. Despite all of the adages that American is the land of the business, we still do not have a broadly understood Constitutional right to economic freedom, which is probably for the worst. However, fully expanding on that subject will have to wait for another time.

The other issue is one of money in politics. Though the

In response to this piece, Ralph Benko flips it around and says that there should be more money in politics. He is correct in pointing out the paradoxical nature of these statements by **blah**. Though he doesn&#8217;t state what always needs to be stated. If we want to get serious about taking money out of government, then clearly we have to limit the areas where influence can be bought. Reforms will have holes. Reducing government does not.

Public choice theory can teach us a number of lessons, but by far the most important is that money is endogenous to politics.

It is a good move for corporations to make their voice heard because of the regulation involved. To take a recent example, Google

http://www.forbes.com/sites/ralphbenko/2013/01/14/theres-much-too-little-money-in-politics/

There needs to be an addendum to this thesis: . The only way to get money out of the game is to reduce the size of the game. In Jefferson&#8217;s time, government was miniscule. Keeping those interests separate was fairly easy.

We have an uneasy tension with &#8220;moneyed interests.&#8221;