---
title: Why “Medieval Peasants Got a Lot More Vacation Time Than You” Is Misleading
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1460
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Reddit resurrected a 2013 [New York Post article][1] today, a slight twist on the old Keynes article about leisure. Medieval peasants had a tough time, it notes, but they also had some times of far more &#8220;vacation&#8221;:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  Plowing and harvesting were backbreaking toil, but the peasant enjoyed anywhere from eight weeks to half the year off. The Church, mindful of how to keep a population from rebelling, enforced frequent mandatory holidays. Weddings, wakes and births might mean a week off quaffing ale to celebrate, and when wandering jugglers or sporting events came to town, the peasant expected time off for entertainment. There were labor-free Sundays, and when the plowing and harvesting seasons were over, the peasant got time to rest, too. In fact, economist Juliet Shor found that during periods of particularly high wages, such as 14th-century England, peasants might put in no more than 150 days a year.
</p>

Not today, however. And why? Well in the Medieval days, there was nothing to consume when wages rose. Even though I have not read the study, I would assume that wages were highest right after the Black Death killed off nearly 1/3 of the population.

Well the article doesn&#8217;t explain why, but offers some current context:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  But the belief that shorter vacations bring economic gains doesn’t appear to add up. According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) the Greeks, who face a horrible economy, work more hours than any other Europeans. In Germany, an economic powerhouse, workers rank second to last in number of hours worked. Despite more time off, German workers are the eighth most productive in Europe, while the long-toiling Greeks rank 24 out of 25 in productivity.
</p>

The arrow of causation here is problematic.

In the Medieval days, there was nothing to consume when wages rises. You could consume more

&nbsp;

German workers are more productive leading them to afford to take time off.

 [1]: http://nypost.com/2013/09/04/medieval-peasants-got-a-lot-more-vacation-time-than-you-economist/