---
title: Tech is Changing Philanthropy
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1497
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
American philanthropy, which has long been the bastion of banking and traditional industry, has been transformed in recent years by the rise of wealth in the tech sector. And with the ascendancy of tech, just how that wealth is being spent is also changing. As The Chronicle of Philanthropy [notes][1],

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  Michael Moody, a professor at Grand Valley State University’s Johnson Center for Philanthropy, predicts that the money in the tech entrepreneurs’ funds won’t necessarily stay there long. He says young donors aren’t interested in building endowments and instead want to promote immediate change, especially when it comes to accelerating the pace of scientific discovery.
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  &#8220;They’re always looking for a better mousetrap,&#8221; he says. &#8220;For a lot of them, that’s how they made their significant wealth.&#8221;
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  Una Osili, director of research at Indiana University’s Lilly Family School of Philanthropy, says she also expects these young donors to get involved in the programs they fund. What’s more, she says, they don’t let institutional boundaries get in the way and instead look at what group of people can provide the best results, no matter where they work.
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  &#8220;It’s not the grateful-alum model,&#8221; she says. &#8220;Younger donors know talent matters. They’ve seen that in their work life, and now they’re applying it to philanthropy. They’re bringing together talent to spur innovation.&#8221;
</p>

 As countless studies of the Silicon Valley attest, the culture of tech entrepreneurs is vastly different than the

 [1]: http://philanthropy.com/article/Young-Tech-Donors-Take-Leading/151653/