---
title: Why the Right Hates American History, A Rebuttal
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1512
categories:
  - Economics
  - Law
  - Politics

---
Sometimes, I feel like I could be outstaying my welcome on Facebook with a subset of my graduate school friends. In an effort to refute articles shared among my friends, I am going to use this space instead of the space on their pages to air my grievances. This time around, I want to explore a couple of points about American legal history in response to a piece entitled, &#8220;[Why the right hates American history][1].&#8221;

The article begins on the issue of birth control, that ever so uncontroversial topic:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  When I was a teenager, it was a felony in parts of the United States to advise a married couple about how to practice birth control. This ended in 1965, in the Griswold v. Connecticut case before the U.S. Supreme Court, when the Court reversed the criminal conviction of a Planned Parenthood program director who had discussed contraception with a married couple, and of a doctor who had prescribed a birth-control device to them.
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  The majority of the Court summarized their ruling by saying, “Would we allow the police to search the sacred precincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions of privacy….”
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  However, Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart disagreed back in 1965, saying that he could find no “right of privacy“ in the Constitution of the United States. Using his logic, under the laws of the day, the couple in question could themselves have been sent to prison for using birth control in their own bedroom.
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  As Justice Stewart wrote in his dissent in the case, “Since 1879 Connecticut has had on its books a law which forbids the use of contraceptives by anyone…. What provision of the Constitution, then, makes this state law invalid? The Court says it is the right of privacy ‘created by several fundamental constitutional guarantees.’ With all deference, I can find no such general right of privacy in the Bill of Rights, in any other part of the Constitution, or in any case ever before decided by this Court.”
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  In that view of American law, Justice Clarence Thomas—who still holds a seat on our nation’s highest court—agrees.
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  In his dissent in a 2003 Texas sodomy case, Thomas wrote, “just like Justice Stewart, I ‘can find [neither in the Bill of Rights nor any other part of the Constitution a] general right of privacy,’ or as the Court terms it today, the ‘liberty of the person both in its spatial and more transcendent dimensions.’”
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  This type of rationale is how we ended up with the Patriot Act and the NSA, but someone with a real knowledge of our history would see where these men were wrong. The Constitution doesn’t grant a right to eat, or to read, or to have children. Yet do we doubt these are rights we hold?
</p>

First off, it is important to note that the Bill of Rights is actually a bill of _negative_ rights. Each of the amendments we know and love restrict what government can do. Thus they compel inaction on the part of the government. The right to eat would be more properly understood as a positive right, which means that the government has an affirmative duty to provide food to everyone. Rights that compel action on the part of the government are not generally a part of the American Constitutional tradition.

For example, take the 1st Amendment:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
</p>

Congress, being representative voice of the people, is forbid from making a law to restrict free speech. While this is not absolute, this Amendment has provided the basis of a body of law that restricts what the government can stop you from saying.

A similar kind of history come from the 4th Amendment:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
</p>

Again, the 4th Amendment lays out that rights shall not be violated, meaning that there will be inaction on the side of government. Also, it should be noted that a proper reading of the 4th Amendment provided the basis for refuting and pushing back against the NSA and the PATRIOT Act.

Generally speaking, the author argues that there is a progressive tint to history that the Right is trying to subdue, which can be traced back to the Founders. However, this cherry picks legal history. For one, the Progressives came about as a legal force at the turn of the 20th century, making it anachronistic to say that there is a tinge of this in the Revolutionary days.

But more importantly, the Progressive reforms at the end of the 1800s and into the early 1900s dramatically altered the understanding of the Due Process Clause, which the Court eventually used to overturn the birth control bans. As scholar Jane Gaines argues, law is always a performance of ideological assumptions, and so too is the understanding of law&#8217;s function in society. This leads us to a very important question that the author needs to seriously address: On what basis of law did birth control bans originally rest? Hopefully you follow my line of reasoning here, but the assumption built into this piece and taken as word by most of contemporary society is that the personal interactions of two consenting individuals can actually be regulated by the government.

The assumption until the late 1800s was actually the opposite. For example, Article 1, Section 10, Clause 1 actually limits states from impairing the obligation of contracts, while the the Due Process clause of the 5th Amendment generally limited government from depriving individuals &#8220;of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.&#8221;

So, a trip down memory lane.

Connecticut adopted the contraception law in 1879, just a couple years after the important Slaughter-House cases were decided. The history here is complex, but in short, the state of Louisiana granted a monopoly to a private slaughterhouse in New Orleans. Other butchers sued and lost via a 5-4 split of the Supreme  Court. The ruling was the first major decision dealing with the newly written 14th Amendment, which was meant as a federal trump of state impositions on rights. As the first section of the 14th Amendment outlines:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
</p>

As the Court decided, the 14th Amendment does not grant the general economic freedom to freely engage in business to the other butchers that the Due Process Clause both in the 5th and 14th Amendments suggests. Infamously, Justice Field dissented, noting that Court had gone far afield earlier decision, failing to preserve &#8220;the right of free labor, one of the most sacred and imprescriptable rights of man&#8230;&#8221; Field&#8217;s [dissenting statement][2] on due process should be carefully considered by this author:

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  This equality of right, with exemption from all disparaging and partial enactments, in the lawful pursuits of life, throughout the whole country, is the distinguishing privilege of citizens of the United States. To them, everywhere, all pursuits, all professions, all avocations are open without other restrictions than such as are imposed equally upon all others of the same age, sex, and condition. The State may prescribe such regulations for every pursuit and calling of life as will promote the public health, secure the good order and advance the general prosperity of society, but, when once prescribed, the pursuit or calling must be free to be followed by every citizen who is within the conditions designated, and will conform to the regulations. This is the fundamental idea upon which our institutions rest, and, unless adhered to in the legislation of the country, our government will be a republic only in name.
</p>

After 1873, the growing social purity movement had some implicit legal backing to push their preferred laws, a move which was reflective of the ideological changes in law. Yet, the laws were always subject to failure on Due Process grounds, and when the issue was taken back up by the Court in the 1960s, it ruled exactly on this line. Many people cite the right to privacy line in the birth control cases, but for legal standards, the Due Process Clause reasoning has been far more influential and cited. As Justice Harlan famously noted,

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  In my view, the proper constitutional inquiry in this case is whether this Connecticut statute infringes the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because the enactment violates basic values &#8220;implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,&#8221; Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325. For reasons stated at length in my dissenting opinion in Poe v. Ullman, supra, I believe that it does. While the relevant inquiry may be aided by resort to one or more of the provisions of the Bill of Rights, it is not dependent on them or any of their radiations. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment stands, in my opinion, on its own bottom.
</p>

&nbsp;

 [1]: http://www.salon.com/2015/02/26/why_the_right_hates_american_history_partner/?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=socialflow
 [2]: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/83/36#writing-USSC_CR_0083_0036_ZD