---
title: Techno-social Engineering
author: Will
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=1838
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
<span style="font-weight: 400;">I’m a couple of chapters into reading </span>[_<span style="font-weight: 400;">Re-Engineering Humanity</span>_][1] <span style="font-weight: 400;">from Brett Frischmann and Evan Selinger, and one part of their rhetoric really bothers me. Throughout the book, they insist that online platforms are engaged in techno-social engineering.</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">Near the beginning of the book, they explain that,</span>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">Companies, institutions, and designers regularly treat us as programmable objects through personalized technologies that are attuned to our personal histories, present behavior and feelings, and predicted futures…</span>
</p>

<p style="padding-left: 30px;">
  <span style="font-weight: 400;">We outsource memory, decision-making, and even our interpersonal relations, among many other things. In constructing many different aspects of ourselves, ranging from intelligence to fitness, attentiveness to sociality, we rely on the techno-social engineers’ tools to train ourselves, and, in doing so, let ourselves be trained. We both herd ourselves and get herded by others.</span>
</p>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">By embedding the term engineering, both Frischmann and Selinger suggest a strong linearity to their discussion that just doesn’t exist in social contexts.</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">Take, for example, the simple example of lash, which is the clearance caused by gaps between parts. If we wanted to model this concept, we could <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backlash_(engineering)">use the formula</a>:</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">$ latex \displaystyle b_{t}=t_{i}-t_{a}\;} b_{t}=t_{i}-t_{a}\ $</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">where:</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">{\displaystyle b_{t}\;} b_{t}\;</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">= backlash due to tooth thickness modifications</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">{\displaystyle t_{i}\;} t_{i}\;</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">= tooth thickness on the pitch circle for ideal gearing (no backlash)</span>

<span style="font-weight: 400;">{\displaystyle t_{a}\;} t_{a}\;</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">= actual tooth thickness<br /> </span>

If I were to put this equation in with some real data, the errors would be minimal.

In contrast, if I were to

<span style="font-weight: 400;">Whereas in a microeconometric model, the error term is some kind of individual heterogeneity, which can be one of the driving forces in micro models/observed data. As such, you can expect to have much lower R2 s even if the model is perfectly specified.</span>

 [1]: https://www.amazon.com/Re-Engineering-Humanity-Brett-Frischmann/dp/1107147093